Those carrying out assessments in schools and colleges and in support of the Disabled Students Allowance can apply for an Assessment Practising Certificate once they are members of the Dyslexia Guild. What is an Assessment Practising Certificate (APC)? An APC provides approved recognition that the holder has relevant and up-to-date knowledge of dyslexia and specific learning difficulties (SpLD), and has the experience and competence to undertake diagnostic assessments and reports. What are the benefits of having a Practising Certificate? An APC is a licence to practise for those carrying out assessments in schools for Exam Access Arrangements and in colleges for the Disabled Students’ Allowance. Many school and college employers also now require their specialist teaching or support staff to obtain an APC. Downloads: Before you apply for your APC why not sign up for our Refresher/Best Practice course? Online course for those looking to gain or renew their APC for further details click here Attendance refresher course Friday 19th May 2017, Lonon. For those looking to gain or renew their APC for further details click here Please note these courses are to refresh your knowledge and cover current best practice in report writing they do NOT give you an APC. How can I obtain or renew an APC? In order to obtain an APC, you must be a qualified specialist teacher/assessor in dyslexia/SpLD or have at least seven years of experience in providing full diagnostic assessments PRIOR to making an application. How much will it cost and how to apply? Dyslexia Action fees are the same as all three APC issuing bodies which are set by the SpLD Assessment Standards Committee (SASC) and are detailed below (fees apply until 31st August 2015 and may be subject to change after this time).New applications Route 1: Recently qualified as a specialist assessor£165Apply for Route 1 Route 1 (plus 5 years): Qualified for over 5 years£240Apply for Route 1 + 5 years Route 2: Portfolio of evidence + 7 years' experience£555Apply for Route 2 Renewals Renewal of APC: Applicants renewing and APC after 3 years£165Renewal checklistRenew my APC Resubmissions Resubmission fee Where the 1st submission has been unsuccessful an application may be resubmitted please email us£110Resubmit an Application Please note important information: All fees include a charge for registration on the SASC website for the life of the APC certificate (3 years) Your application process will not start until all fees are paid in full (if your organisation are paying for your application you must ensure that they pay the fee in a timely manner otherwise your application will be delayed) If you are unable to submit your application electronically (our preferred method please contact us directly for the relevant documents in word format (if you submit by post we will require 3 copies of the application to be posted to us). Guild members can apply for an APC or those without Guild membership can join at the time of applying For further details please email us or call 01784 222342. The Dyslexia Guild is an APC issuing body recognised by the SpLD assessment standards committee (SASC). Contact us For more information please email us or call 01784 222342.