What is this about? This post is part of an extended series on speech-assisted reading on mobile devices (I call it STAR for speech-and-tablet-assisted reading). In this post, we will have a look at a special feature of iPhones and iPads called Speak Screen that will read out any text on the screen of your device. Quick summary 1. Go to Settings, Accessibility, Speech and enable Speak Screen 2. Swipe from the top edge with two fingers on any screen with text such as a web page or a document What is Speak Screen? Speak Screen is a built-in feature of iPhones and iPads that will read any text on screen using text-to-speech. Speak Screen will read: Web pages PDF documents Kindle Books iBooks Setting and help screens Speak Screen is really great for people with dyslexia or low vision. I know one person with dyslexia who switched to the iPhone from Android just because of this feature. Speak Screen is different from VoiceOver which is intended for blind people. Voice Over will read all the text on every screen. It will even read names on icons when you tap on them. This means that instead of tapping you have to double tap. For people who are not blind, having everything read out is really confusing. VoiceOver was a part of the iOS from the beginning, Speak Screen was only introduced in iOS version 8 two years ago (in 2014). Enabling Speak Screen on your iPhone or iPad Enabling Speak Screen is very easy. You can do it in 4 taps. Tap on the Settings icon on the home screen In the General section, tap on Accessibility > Tap on Speech > Toggle the Speak Screen switch on by tapping on it That’s it. You can now use Speak Screen. I also like to enable the Highlight Content option to make it easier to follow what is being read. Speak Selection is also a useful option for when you do not want to hear everything on the screen. You should also enable a higher quality voice. You can do it in Settings > General > Accessibility > Speech > Voices. Note: Your iPhone or iPad must be running iOS 8 or later. All iPads except the very first one and all iPhones from iPhone 4S on are compatible. The upgrade is free and if you haven’t done it yet, now is the time. Upgrade in Settings > General > Software Update. Make sure you back up your photos before the upgrade. Using Speak Screen To start reading text with Speak Screen, simply swipe down from the top edge of the screen with two fingers. Controlling Speak Screen When Speak Screen starts, a floating toolbar will pop up. You can use it to control the speech: Play and pause Slow down or speed up Jump back and forward Minimise the floating bar Exit speak screen After a while, the floating toolbar will minimise itself and become just a translucent button. When you want to go get the controls back, tap on that button again. Listening to web pages One of the problems with Speak Screen on a web page is that it reads everything. Even the things you don’t want – like links at the top of the screen or related information in the side bars. To make sure you start reading the article you want, tap on the Reader mode button in Safari before you start Speak Screen. You will find it to the left of the web address bar at the top of the screen. Even in the Reader Mode, Speak Screen will read hidden image descriptions for blind readers – this can be confusing for sighted readers because you are hearing text that is not on the screen. If you have highlighting turned on, the text will be highlighted. But the highlighting will often get confused around images. Listening to documents Speak Screen works with any text document like Word and PDF. It will also read emails and even Google Docs. It does not read Google Slides and PowerPoint in a sensible way but it will read text inside slides when selected. It will not read text inside images. Listening to iBooks Speak Screen can turn any book or document in your iBooks library into an audiobook. It will also highlight each word as it is being read. The only problem is that the speech pauses at the end of every page even in the middle of the sentence. If you use very large text as is recommended, this can get very distracting. The skip buttons skip by a whole page. This is also not ideal. The best apps skip by a sentence or even let you choose. In general, if you want to listen to books on the iPad a reader app with built-in speech like the VoiceDream Reader will be better. Listening to Kindle books Speak Screen on an iPad is the only way you can listen to Kindle books on any tablet other than the Kindle Fire. It is very similar to iBooks but the text is not highlighted. Skip buttons also turn the page and the play back pauses at the end of every page even in the middle of the sentence. Listening on older devices I only have the original iPad Mini (now four years old) and I found that with longer text, Speak Screen would stutter and skip a few words about once per page. I know that this is not an issue with newer devices. Next time: Android alternatives Speak Screen is very unique to iPhones and iPads. It is a great feature despite some shortcomings. Unfortunately, there is no equivalent feature on Android phones and tablets. You can turn on Talk Back for blind users but that reads everything on the screen and turns taps into double taps. Luckily, there are a number of apps that can replicate much of the functionality. Over the next several posts, we will review some apps that can be used to replicate Speak Screen on Android. Web pages: @VoiceAloud, CaptiVoice Books: Moon+ Pro, Aldiko, Bookari, VoiceDream Reader, Easy Reader Documents: CaptiVoice, @Voice Aloud We will start with @Voice Aloud. Tech Thursday is written by Dominik Lukes - Education and Technology Specialist