Overview This is the second part in our four part series on Audiobooks. Getting free audiobooks from local libraries via Overdrive Audiobook services for people with learning difficulties Commercial audiobook services Audiobook listening apps In this part, we will look at services offering audiobooks to people with vision impairments and learning disabilities such as dyslexia in the UK. We will look at (listed alphabetically): Who are these services for? The three services we are considering all started their life aiming to make more books accessible to blind and partially sighted people. Now, thanks to the Print Disability license, they’ve started offering the books to people with dyslexia and other conditions that prevent them from reading standard print. This includes physical disabilities. This means that sometimes, it may not be immediately obvious from the website that people with dyslexia are welcome. But that should not discourage you. They all welcome readers with dyslexia, as well. Calibre Audio Library Subjects and books Calibre Audio Library offers over 8,000 audiobooks covering various areas. You can browse the library online. Their subjects include fiction and general nonfiction but also many curriculum-related books in: GCSE History Science Calibre also has 1,500 audiobooks aimed at young children accessible via a separate website called Young Calibre. Formats and delivery All the books are either delivered by post as: MP3 CD – a CD with audio files on it. This will only play on computers or specialised players also sold by Calibre MP3 USB – a USB key with audio files on it. This should be the preferred option for most people because many modern computers do not have CD drives. Calibre also sells players that will play these USB keys directly They are also available via live online streaming. The MP3s do not have copy protection and can be played in any software or app. Fees and joining procedure Calibre requires a one-time joining fee of £35 (£20 for Young Calibre). It is free to use after that. You can apply online or by post. Listening Books Subjects and books Listening Books covers more of the curriculum areas and more thoroughly than others on this list. You can browse their library by subject or by Key Stage. Its subjects include: Art English Citizenship Geography Religious Education Science Others There is also the usual coverage of general fiction and non-fiction. In total, Listening Books includes about 7,000 titles. Listening Books get their books from publishers or record them themselves in their studios. Formats and delivery You can get listening books as: Downloads MP3 CDs Streaming Note: Not all books are available in all formats. The MP3s do not have copy protection and can be played in any software or app. Fees and joining procedure You can join online or via phone. There are several levels with an annual fee: Download and online streaming only (£20/year) Postal delivery of MP3 CDs only (£35/year) Online and post (£45) They also offer assistance for those who cannot afford the fees. Organisational memberships are also available (at a little over 2x the cost of the individual ones). RNIB Talking Books Subjects and books The RNIB Talking Books library offers over 23,000 audiobooks. It is the largest of the four we are looking at. The library covers the usual range of general interest titles. It does not systematically cover the UK curriculum subjects. Formats and delivery The RNIB Talking Books library uses Overdrive and books are downloaded via the Overdrive apps described last week. MP3 CDs or USB Sticks by post are also available. These use MP3 files that can be navigated using the DAISY format. Fees and joining procedures The service is free to blind and partially sighted people. People with dyslexia can also apply. The online application procedure is quite involved. You have to click on several links before you get to a page where you can add your application to a shopping basket. The application is free but you can also include a donation or buy a player. This takes you to a form where you can indicate your type of disability. Which one should you choose? These services are not mutually exclusive and they are certainly not in competition with each other. They each have something to recommend and some people may like to subscribe to more than one. RNIB Talking Books is free and has the widest selection of general interest books. It also has the easiest way to get books on to your device using the OverDrive apps. The registration procedure is quite confusing at first. Listening Books has an edge when it comes to curriculum materials and may be most suitable for students. Its downloads can be played using any apps, although many books are only available via a CD. Calibre Audio Library only requires a one-time fee and it has a decent selection across the board. The USB Key option is better than a CD-only one but there are no downloads. Next time Next time we will have a look at Audible and other commercial audiobook providers.